HALO: Interactive Co-abductive Reasoning in Scientific
Hypothesis Generation

Anonymous Author(s)

Improved-candidate Cluster

Strategy Identification

Multi-strategy Synthesis

Generating Hypothesis Candidates and
Clustering by Property Improvement Profiles

Distilling Optimization Strategies within
Clusters (Intra-cluster Strategy)

Synthesizing Inter-cluster Strategies
into Promising Hypotheses

Hypothesis Candidate Generation with AI

Initial
molecule

P1 P2 P3 P4

HALO-1

HALO-5

P1 P2 P3 P4

P1 P2 P3 P4

HALO-2

HALO-6

HALO-7

P1 P2 P3 P4

P1 P2 P3 P4

P1 P2 P3 P4

HALO-8

HALO-9

HALO-3

Improved
Property
Worsened
Property

Composing and Refining Strategies

P1 P2 P3 P4

P1 P2 P3 P4

P1 P2 P3 P4

HALO-4

HALO-10

HALO-11

P1 P2 P3 P4

P1 P2 P3 P4

P1 P2 P3 P4

Cluster-1

P1 P2 P3 P4

Cluster-2

Explanation for Cluster-1:

Cluster-4

While Cluster-1 variants show incremental improvements in
P2, P3, and P4, they exhibit a simultaneous decline in P1
due to the increased steric bulk on the terminal aromatic
ring.

Inter-Cluster Strategies (across all clusters)
1A+2A+3A+4B

Strategy-1A

Cluster-3

P1 P2 P3 P4

Intra-Cluster Strategy-1A (Within Cluster 1)

Cluster-2

P1 P2 P3 P4

Cluster-1

P1 P2 P3 P4

Cluster-3

LLM Explanations and Strategies
Cluster-4

1B + 3B

1B+2B +4B

Cluster-1
P1 P2 P3 P4

Cluster-2
P1 P2 P3 P4

Cluster-3
P1 P2 P3 P4

Cluster-4

P1 P2 P3 P4

P1 P2 P3 P4

P1 P2 P3 P4

Figure 1: HALO is a human-AI collaborative system that assists medicinal chemists in abductive reasoning to generate promising
hypotheses in ligand (molecule) optimization. HALO supports abductive reasoning through three stages: (1) Improved-candidate
Cluster, experts and AI generate hypothesis candidates (molecule) and cluster them by property improvement profiles (green:
augmented and red: worsened); (2) Strategy Identification, a large language model (LLM) generates explanations for clusters
and provides strategies to improve the worsened property (intra-cluster strategies); 3) Multi-strategy Synthesis, LLM suggests
multiple strategies across clusters (inter-cluster strategies) and experts iteratively refine their molecules until targeted properties
are satisfied.

Abstract

optimization by enabling improved-candidate cluster, strategy identification, and multi-strategy synthesis. In expert studies involving
10 medicinal chemists, HALO significantly facilitated abductive
reasoning for hypothesis generation—efficient candidate observation, systematic strategy identification, and coherent multi-strategy
composition—and enabled participants to produce higher-quality,
more diverse candidate molecules.

Scientific discovery is essential yet inefficient, primarily because
generating hypotheses within a vast search space hinders breakthroughs. While current AI systems assist in generating new hypothesis candidates, they lack interactive support for the reasoning
process by which users develop these outputs into promising hypotheses, resulting in surface-level hypotheses. To address this
issue, we present a co-abduction, a human-AI collaborative framework for abductive reasoning in scientific hypothesis generation.
To operationalize co-abduction, we build HALO, a human–AI collaborative system for hypothesis generation in ligand (molecule)

ACM Reference Format:
Anonymous Author(s). 2025. HALO: Interactive Co-abductive Reasoning
in Scientific Hypothesis Generation. In Proceedings of Make sure to enter the correct conference title from your rights confirmation emai (Conference acronym ’XX). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 20 pages. https://doi.org/
XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX

P1 P2 P3 P4

Strategy-1B

Clustering by Property Improvement Profiles

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
Conference acronym ’XX, Woodstock, NY
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX

Introduction

Scientific discovery advances human progress by generating new
knowledge, entities, and mechanisms [93]. Penicillin saved millions
of lives by curing previously lethal infections [28], and semiconductors enabled modern computing [70]. Achieving these breakthroughs required researchers to identify novel directions through
extensive experimentation and refinement, a process that is both

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2025, Woodstock, NY

Anon.

time- and cost-intensive. Bringing a single new drug to market,
for example, typically requires around 14 years and nearly $2 billion [40, 108].
A key bottleneck in this process is hypothesis generation, which
requires researchers to reason across high-dimensional search spaces
while balancing complex trade-offs among competing criteria [86].
For example, in drug discovery, medicinal chemists must navigate a
chemical space estimated at 1023 –1060 possible molecules [8] while
balancing trade-offs among pharmacological properties such as
absorption (e.g., PLogP [96]), toxicity (e.g., DILI [16]), and blood–
brain barrier permeability (e.g., BBBP [97]). Similarly, in materials
science, researchers must explore approximately 1010 possible quaternary compounds [24] to optimize battery electrolytes, balancing
ionic conductivity against electrochemical stability [88]. Although
computational tools broaden exploration in these search spaces,
they still offer only partial support for hypothesis formulation, iterative refinement, and reasoning about property trade-offs, leaving
manual work to experts.
Recent advances in AI have opened new avenues for hypothesis generation. Generative models now retrieve [60, 61, 81] and
produce hypotheses [20, 72, 111] across diverse scientific tasks,
including multi-property molecule optimization [25], 3D proteinligand docking [49], and phenotypic profiling [13]. Interactive AI
systems in HCI extend these capabilities to support research question formulation [63, 79], related work retrieval [50, 57, 59, 78, 110],
and data analysis [36, 53, 91], enabling researchers to engage with
previously unexplored information.
However, to the best of our knowledge, no AI tools interactively
support the reasoning process during hypothesis generation [77].
Without such support, AI-generated outputs prone to hallucination [77] risk proposing hypotheses that lack grounding in rigorous
scientific reasoning [84]. At the same time, researchers narrow their
search to familiar patterns, often overlooking novel and promising directions [4, 35, 93]. Designing AI to actively support this
reasoning process remains an open challenge in HCI.
In this paper, we present a co-abduction framework that extends
abductive reasoning [75] to human-AI collaboration in hypothesis generation. Researchers and AI jointly generate and cluster
hypothesis candidates by property improvement profiles, identify
strategies to improve properties within each cluster, and synthesize
strategies across clusters to produce new and promising hypotheses. We demonstrate our approach through ligand optimization
in drug discovery1 , where researchers navigate a chemical space
estimated at 1060 molecules while managing complex trade-offs
between multiple pharmacological properties, such as improving
solubility while preventing an increase in toxicity.
We conducted a formative study with five medicinal chemists
to understand how they use AI in their reasoning. Chemists use
generative models (e.g., GeLLM4 O-C [26] and DrugGen [90]) to produce improved molecules, group them by the property improved,
and identify recurring fragment–property relationships. They then
recombine fragments across groups to generate hypotheses that
balance multiple properties, connecting structural observations
to broader explanatory patterns. Our findings revealed that this
workflow aligns with abductive reasoning [75, 103] across three

stages: observation, pattern identification, and hypothesis generation. However, each stage exposes gaps in current tool support: (1)
filtering improved molecules lacks streamlined support, (2) identifying frequent fragments is labor-intensive while LLMs remain
unreliable due to hallucination, and (3) LLMs lose coherence during
iterative multi-fragment refinement.
Based on these insights, we developed HALO (Figure 1), an interactive interface for human-AI co-abduction:

• Improved-candidate Cluster: The system generates molecules 183
improving target properties and clusters them by property
improvement profiles.
• Strategy Identification: Researchers explore clusters, and
AI explains patterns and suggests strategies for improving
worsened properties (intra-cluster strategy).
• Multi-strategy Synthesis: AI suggests strategies across
clusters (inter-cluster strategy), and researchers recombine
and refine them iteratively until target properties are met.

We conducted an expert study with 10 medicinal chemists, comparing HALO against a baseline with the same AI model but no
abductive reasoning support. Participants rated HALO significantly
higher in observation (𝑝 < 0.01), strategy identification (𝑝 < 0.01),
multi-strategy composition (𝑝 < 0.01), and overall satisfaction (𝑝
< 0.01), as well as ligand optimization quality and diversity. Usage
analysis further revealed that participants frequently experienced
abductive leaps (“aha!” moments [31, 56]), after which they showed
greater initiative and sharply reduced their reliance on AI in favor
of manual editing. These findings suggest that human-AI collaboration should adapt to the user’s cognitive stage: before an abductive
leap, AI should act as a catalyst, providing divergent triggers; after
the leap, AI should shift to a supporting role as users refine their
realizations.
In summary, our key contributions are as follows:
• Co-abduction, a human-AI collaborative framework for abductive reasoning in scientific hypothesis generation, enabling efficient observation, systematic strategy identification, and coherent multi-strategy synthesis.
• Design and implementation of HALO, an AI system that
supports co-abduction for hypothesis generation in ligand
optimization.
• An expert study with 10 professionals demonstrating that
iterative co-abduction significantly improves hypothesis
quality and diversity.
• Design implications for building AI systems to support
hypothesis generation in scientific domains.

1 See §A.1 for more background information

2 Related work
2.1 Hypothesis Generation in Scientific
Domains

Hypothesis generation is an iterative reasoning process central to
scientific discovery [84], in which researchers explore data representations to develop and refine plausible explanations [56, 86].
Across scientific domains, this process requires navigating highdimensional search spaces while managing trade-offs among competing criteria. In drug discovery, the space of drug-like molecules
spans 1023 –1060 [8, 76], with competing pharmacological properties

HALO : Interactive Co-abductive Reasoning in Scientific Hypothesis Generation

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2025, Woodstock, NY

such as stability, solubility, and toxicity [88]. Materials discovery
confronts over 1012 inorganic compositions [24], requiring balance
among conductivity, mechanical robustness, thermodynamic stability, synthesizability, and cost [11, 45]. Bioscience faces still larger
spaces, where a 100-residue protein sequence yields 20100 ≈ 10130
possibilities [29], with fundamental trade-offs between bioactivity
and stability [9, 100].
To navigate vast hypothesis spaces across multiple criteria, scientific communities have developed computational interfaces that
integrate large-scale databases to support the retrieval and screening of validated findings. In drug discovery, platforms such as PubChem [54] and ChEMBL [38] provide searchable access to chemical structures and bioactivity data. In materials science, resources
like the MaterialsAtlas [83] and AFLOW [23] enable filtering of
inorganic compounds by stability and functional properties. In bioscience, repositories such as UniProt [21] and the Protein Data Bank
(PDB) [6] offer curated sequence and structural data for comparative analysis. Despite these advancements, most systems focus
on retrieving and ranking previously validated data rather than
supporting interactive reasoning, which is a core part of hypothesis
generation.

uncover explanations behind emerging patterns and apply them to
generate well-grounded hypotheses.

2.2

2.3

Co-abductive Reasoning: Synergizing
Human and AI

Abductive reasoning is the process of inferring the most plausible
explanation for an observed phenomenon, whether diagnosing
the cause of a failure or decoding the principles of success for
further optimization [75]. While deduction guarantees certainty and
induction establishes probability [41, 82, 89], abduction provides the
creative leap necessary to introduce novel hypotheses in the face
of uncertainty [75, 103], and stands as the only logical operation
capable of generating truly new ideas [5, 75].
However, traditional abduction has been criticized for merely
proposing hypotheses to explain a phenomenon, which allows
loosely grounded conjecture or reduces to simply confirming what
is already known [74]. Abduction functions not only as a logical
form but also as a strategic methodology that integrates all available
constraints and background knowledge into a coherent, organized
pattern [58, 74]. The ultimate goal of abductive reasoning is the
abductive leap, an insightful reconfiguration of observations into
a plausible explanatory hypothesis [37], often experienced as an
Aha! moment [12, 99] of sudden understanding. This abductive leap
does not result from creating entirely new hypotheses, but from
strategically combining previously unconnected elements within a
specific problem context and recognizing their validity anew [74].
Building on this critique, abductive discovery should be understood not as mere intuitive guessing, but as a process of strategically
organizing and rearranging available constraints and background
knowledge. To operationalize such strategic abduction, we propose
co-abductive reasoning, in which humans and AI share a continuous
abductive loop through three stages: (1) Improved-candidate Clustering, clustering hypothesis candidates by property improvement
profiles; (2) Strategy Identification, distilling optimization strategies
within a cluster; and (3) Multi-strategy Synthesis, combining strategies across clusters to iteratively refine molecules toward target
properties.

AI Systems for Hypothesis Generation

Recent advances in AI models have begun to accelerate the hypothesisgeneration process. Generative models show great potential for
hypothesis generation by retrieving [60, 61, 81] and generating hypotheses [20, 72, 111]. These models enable systematic exploration
of vast hypothesis spaces by synthesizing multimodal scientific
data and identifying latent patterns that inform experimental design. Building on these technical capabilities, specialized platforms
are emerging that integrate diverse models to support the entire
pipeline, from data preprocessing to model deployment. For example, Nvidia BioNeMo [1] is an AI platform for drug discovery that
simplifies and accelerates the development and training of various
AI models for drug discovery applications, such as AlphaFold [49],
DiffDock [22], and MegaMolBART [44].
Building on these advances, interactive AI systems in HCI increasingly support hypothesis generation, including research question formulation, paper retrieval, and data analysis. For research
question formulation, IdeaSynth enables iterative refinement of research briefs, allowing users to explore variations of initial ideas [79],
while PersonaFlow supports research question refinement through
feedback from multiple domain expert perspectives [63]. For paper retrieval, BIP! Finder accelerates literature review through AIassisted document synthesis [57], and ComLittee assembles expert
committees to recommend papers based on members’ expertise [50].
For data analysis, MedChemLens provides visual tools for extracting
drug-related insights from existing records [91], and FathomGPT
supports interactive exploration and analysis of ocean science data,
images, and figures [53].
Although existing systems effectively broaden the search space,
they provide little support for reasoning about the trade-offs that
determine which hypotheses are scientifically viable. Researchers
must still manually synthesize fragmented AI outputs to identify promising directions. We introduce HALO, an interactive coabduction framework in which researchers and AI collaboratively

Formative study

The formative study aimed to understand (1) how medicinal chemists
perform ligand optimization in practice; (2) how AI tools are currently used during ligand optimization; and (3) the limitations of
existing AI systems in supporting this task, which informed our
design goals.

3.1

Participant

We recruited five participants with backgrounds in medicinal chemistry for the formative study: four senior researchers and one Ph.D.
candidate, all currently working on ligand optimization (see Table 4
in the appendix). Their work experience ranged from 4 to 18 years
(𝑀 = 12.2, 𝑆𝐷 = 5.4). Participants were recruited through personal
referrals and by contacting research labs via email to request collaboration. The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board
(IRB), and participants’ consent was obtained before the study. Each
participant received a $35 gift certificate. When reporting interview
quotes, we use 𝑃𝑛 to denote the participant number.

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2025, Woodstock, NY

3.2

The study consisted of three parts. First, we conducted a 30-minute
in-depth interview covering (1) participants’ workflow in ligand
optimization, (2) their goals and strategies when using AI tools, and
(3) their past experiences with AI tools in ligand optimization, including challenges encountered. Next, a 20-minute workflow observation session provided deeper insight into their design strategies
as participants used their preferred AI tools to optimize molecules
they were currently working on. Finally, a 20-minute post-task interview focused on their refinement strategies and difficulties. Each
session lasted 1 to 1.5 hours. After completing the interviews, we
applied thematic analysis and iterative open coding [19] to analyze
the interview transcripts. Three authors coded and analyzed the
transcripts for emerging themes, and the findings were discussed
among the co-authors iteratively until consensus was reached.

Anon.

Procedure

scaffold with selected fragments at modifiable positions (R-groups).
They define several positions (R1 , R2 , R3 ) on the scaffold and systematically assign the previously identified fragments to these sites,
generating a series of analogs with different property profiles.
This process, in a small-scale synthesis setting, typically takes at
least one week. In the first round, researchers design approximately
7 to 10 candidate molecules and evaluate their properties through
wet-lab experiments. In the second round, based on these results,
they iteratively refine and expand promising candidates, ultimately
generating a larger set of over 20 molecules for further exploration.
3.3.2 Roles of AI in Ligand Optimization. Medicinal chemists often
use specialized AI models to design and evaluate new molecules.
In addition, large language models have been applied to reasoning
strategies for optimization, such as grouping improved molecules,
distilling strategies from these groups, and integrating the strategies
into a final design.
All participants are familiar with using molecular generation
models, such as GeLLM4 O-C [26] and DrugGen [90], to directly explore novel chemical space. These models generate new molecules
to simultaneously optimize multiple properties, given the initial
molecule and the targeted properties. Researchers efficiently explore vast molecular spaces using generative AI models. For example, “Generative models can easily generate new molecules to satisfy
properties. Although many of them are difficult to synthesize, they
often provide ideas or structural variations that we would not have
considered.” (𝑃2). However, these tools often require programming
knowledge and familiarity with computational workflows, creating
a practical barrier for many experimental chemists. “Many generative chemistry models have great potential, but they are hard to use
in practice for researchers who do not have coding experience” (𝑃4).
“...ChatGPT and Gemini might have potential in generating molecules;
for now, the results are not that promising.” (𝑃3).
For evaluation, the overall pharmaceutical property scores of
these generated molecules are evaluated with AI-based interfaces
such as SwissADME 2 and ADMET LAB 3 , with real-time evaluation.
Medicinal chemists manually edit the generated molecules and
repeat the process until the desired properties are achieved.
With recent advances in LLM capabilities, many researchers
expect these systems to move beyond generation and evaluation to
support reasoning for new hypotheses. In practice, they frequently
consult LLM interfaces such as ChatGPT4 and Gemini5 . Researchers
often input multiple improved molecules into the model and ask it
to group and distill the most frequent fragment patterns. “Once we
fix the scaffold, I often ask an LLM to suggest plausible R-group substitutions that could modulate potency, selectivity, or ADMET properties
to understand some patterns between augmentation and molecular
structures.” (𝑃 1 ) To combine multiple strategies, researchers often
input pairs of group-augmented molecules into an LLM to explore
potential combinations of modifications. Although hallucination
remains a concern, the model occasionally suggests meaningful
and novel combinations. Despite this potential, LLM outputs still
require substantial manual refinement. For example, “The model can

3.3

Findings

We identified that, to optimize molecules, researchers typically follow three stages (§3.3.1): (1) grouping molecules that exhibit property improvements, (2) extracting patterns between augmented
properties and structural fragments, and (3) combining these patterns to design new candidate molecules with improved multiproperty profiles. We found that this process aligns with abductive
reasoning, a representative theory of hypothesis generation that
moves from observation to pattern discovery to hypothesis formulation.
Building on this perspective, we examined both the role of AI
(§3.3.2) and its limitations within each abductive step (§3.3.3) and, in
turn, derived our system design goals to better support hypothesisdriven molecular optimization (§3.4).
3.3.1 Hypothesis generation in lead optimization. We identified
three stages in ligand optimization: (1) grouping molecules that
show property improvements, (2) extracting patterns between augmented properties and structural fragments, and (3) combining
these patterns to design new candidate molecules with improved
multi-property profiles.
First, medicinal chemists identify candidates for the R-group
and group them based on their impact on specific pharmacological properties. They determine the core scaffold of an initial lead
compound that must be preserved, as well as the R-groups that
can be modified. They then search for prior optimization cases
with the target properties. Researchers often identify molecules in
which specific target properties have been notably improved, such
as one or two out of four, and group them accordingly. Next, they
determine which fragments contributed to improvements in particular properties. Within each group of molecules, fragments that
appear most frequently are considered more likely to be associated
with the observed property improvements. For example, molecules
that score highly in solubility and toxicity mitigation often contain
specific polar functional groups, whereas molecules with improved
permeability and potency frequently include hydrophobic or aromatic substituents [3, 18, 39].Such relationships between specific
fragments and property improvements provide valuable strategies
for researchers aiming to optimize multiple properties simultaneously. Based on these findings, they design and evaluate compounds
through R-group optimization [10], combining the preserved core

2 http://www.swissadme.ch
3 https://admetlab3.scbdd.com/

4 https://chatgpt.com/

5 https://gemini.google.com/

HALO : Interactive Co-abductive Reasoning in Scientific Hypothesis Generation

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2025, Woodstock, NY

• DG2: Systematic Strategy Identification through Pattern Formalization within Groups. The system should
provide explicit guidance on understanding patterns between a fragment and a property, specifically which fragments are used for modification and where to position them
for R-group design, thereby reducing reliance on manual
and heuristic inspection of molecules.
• DG3: Coherent Multi-Strategy Synthesis across Groups.
The system should maintain structural and contextual coherence as researchers recombine and refine multiple strategies across groups by simplifying the assembly of complex
molecule combinations and reducing the cognitive load of
merging complex optimization paths.

propose interesting combinations, but we still need to manually evaluate whether they make chemical sense and whether the properties
actually improve.” (𝑃3 )

3.3.3 AI Optimization Workflows and Key Challenges. In the workflow observation, their workflows were similar: they generate multiple molecules, identify relationships between augmenting properties and specific fragments, and iteratively refine the initial molecule
by integrating these relationships.
They usually begin by grouping molecules whose properties have
been improved (improved molecules). However, a key challenge
was the lack of a streamlined way to filter for improved molecules;
consequently, researchers had to manually summarize the AI output
from generation and evaluation for multiple molecules. “When I
generate hundreds of variants from fragment substitutions, I have to
evaluate each one individually and manually prioritize them, which
makes the process overwhelming”(𝑃3). This labor-intensive process
prevents them from fully leveraging generation and evaluation
models. These challenges highlight the inefficiencies caused by
the disconnect between molecular generation and the discovery of
meaningful patterns.
Another critical bottleneck is that standard LLMs lack spatial
grounding; they cannot visually identify which specific regions of a
molecule are functionally significant. Because LLMs primarily operate on text-based representations such as SMILES [105], they cannot
intuitively demonstrate how a fragment’s efficacy varies with its
precise spatial positioning. “Even if we have a list of molecules, we
still need to manually map each fragment to R1 , R2 , or R3 before
we can analyze which fragments are actually driving the property
changes.” (𝑃4). Consequently, researchers must manually inspect
molecular structures to determine where specific fragments can
be applied. Given that a fragment’s impact can change drastically
depending on its location, this limitation prevents experts from
effectively leveraging LLMs to clearly identify patterns between a
fragment and a property.
The final major challenge is maintaining context when integrating multiple strategies. Even with grouped molecules and extracted
patterns, LLMs often lose track of these complex constraints during
the iterative refinement of multi-pattern combinations. "“When I
try to combine a strategy for improving solubility with another for
enhancing potency, the model often ’forgets’ the original scaffold constraints or swaps functional groups in ways that make no sense. It’s
like it loses the big picture while focusing on a specific edit.” (𝑃 2 ).
Consequently, this lack of context retention can result in chemically implausible structures or hallucinated suggestions that violate
fundamental chemical principles or predefined optimization goals.

HALO: Human-AI Co-abduction system for
Lead Optimization

Building on these design goals (DG1-3), we present HALO, a humanAI co-abduction system for lead optimization through three main
components: 1) MolCluster, 2) MolStrategy, and 3) MolSynthesis.
We explain technical details of three components in §A.7 in the
appendix.

4.1

MolCluster: Improved Candidates Cluster

MolCluster (Figure 2-B) is designed to support efficient observation by enabling users to explore which properties have improved
or worsened during AI-driven generation, forming an initial understanding of the optimization landscape. Users can explore and
organize diverse molecule clusters as a foundation for subsequent
strategy identification and synthesis. The workflow proceeds as
follows:

• Step 1-1: Users first generate dozens of candidate molecules
from an initial molecule on an interactive trajectory map (Figure 2-A) using a generative AI model or by manual editing.
The trajectory map allows them to observe how molecular
structures evolve and how these changes affect the property
score.
• Step 1-2: The MolCluster (Figure 2-B) enables multi-criteria
screening of the candidate set, grouping molecules into clusters based on combinations of improved properties (green:
augmented and red: worsened).
• Step 1-3: By creating these clusters, users develop an understanding of the landscape of generated molecules. They identify worsened properties and use these insights to guide subsequent optimization steps.

3.4

4.2

Design goals

Based on these findings, we proposed three design goals for our
system:

MolStrategy: Systematic Strategy
Identification

MolStrategy (Figure 2-C) is designed to help users systematically
identify optimization strategies within a cluster by exposing detailed cluster-level insights. The workflow proceeds as follows:

• DG1: Efficient Observation through Grouping of Improved Molecules. The system should enable researchers
to group improved molecules by diverse property combinations, intuitively connecting molecular generation with the
discovery of meaningful patterns without labor-intensive
manual inspection.

• Step 2-1: The overview tab (Figure 10 in the appendix) displays
an AI-generated summary of the cluster alongside its identified
strengths and weaknesses to help users understand an cluster
overall.

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2025, Woodstock, NY

Anon.

Stage 1 & 2: Improved-candidates Cluster & Strategy Identification

Candidates are generated on a trajectory map, and organized into clusters to identify strategies within a cluster.

MolStrategy: Strategy Identification

C

MolCluster: Improved Candidates Cluster

B

A

F

Stage 3: Multi-strategy Synthesis

Multiple strategies across clusters are recombined into new, promising hypothesis candidates.

MolSynthesis: Multi-strategy across Clusters

D

Strategy Recomposition

E

Figure 2: Overview of the HALO workflow: (1) Improved Candidates Cluster, (2) Strategy Identification, and (3) Multi-strategy
Synthesis. Improved Candidates Cluster (A, B) generated molecules and organized them into property-based clusters to support
efficient observation. Strategy Identification (C) extracts and summarizes intra-cluster optimization strategies from candidate
groups. Multi-strategy Synthesis (D, E) enables users to recombine multiple intra-and inter-strategies into actionable edits to
generate new, promising candidates. The Insight button (F) allows users to externalize and reflect on abductive leaps as they
occur throughout the workflow.

HALO : Interactive Co-abductive Reasoning in Scientific Hypothesis Generation

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2025, Woodstock, NY

• RQ1-2: Can HALO support researchers in systematically
identifying optimization strategies within groups of improved molecules?
• RQ1-3: Can HALO enable researchers to coherently recombine multiple optimization strategies to generate new
candidate molecules?
• RQ2: To what extent does HALO achieve multi-objective
property enhancement while maintaining structural diversity compared to baselines?
• RQ3: Does an abductive leap occur during the use of HALO,
and if so, how does it transform human–AI interaction in
the discovery trajectory?

• Step 2-2: The candidates tab (Figure 10 in the appendix) displays all cluster members in a sortable table with absolute
property values and improvement deltas relative to the initial
molecule.
• Step 2-3: The strategies tab summarizes actionable strategies
for improving worsened properties within the cluster, suggesting which molecular fragments of cluster members should
be modified to address observed weaknesses. If users click
a molecule in the list, they can open MolSynthesis to edit it
(Figure 2-C).

4.3

MolSynthesis: Coherent Multi-strategy
Synthesis

• Step 3-1: MolSynthesis provides users with both intra-cluster
and inter-cluster strategies with specific explanations, enabling users to explore diverse fragments for optimization
(Figure 2-D).
• Step 3-2: When users click on a particular strategy, the molecule on the molecule editor (Figure 2-E) is updated to reflect
the strategies.
• Step 3-3: Users can check the change of property scores at
the bottom (green: augmented and red: worsened), and with
the change, they iteratively refine the molecules until more
properties are satisfied.
• Step 3-4: Saving creates a new node on the tree, connected
to its source by an edit edge, which can serve as the starting
point for a new round of generation (Figure 2-A).

We expect that HALO supports co-abduction through three
stages: observing improved hypothesis candidates, distilling optimization strategies, and synthesizing multiple strategies, thereby
helping users generate new, promising hypotheses.

Our user study evaluates how HALO supports professionals in abductive reasoning within their workflows: 1) grouping improved
molecules, 2) extracting strategies from groups, and 3) merging
strategies into a new one. We conducted a within-subjects experiment simulating real-world ligand-optimization workflows.
To isolate and evaluate co-abductive reasoning, we developed
a baseline system (§A.6 in the appendix) that includes the nonco-abductive features of HALO (e.g., trajectory map, AI/manual
molecule generator, Moleuclar information, and LLM search) but
excludes three co-abductive features (MolCluster, MolStrategy, and
MolSynthesis). This controlled comparison allows us to assess the
contribution of co-abduction in HALO for hypothesis generation
workflows.
Our study aimed to answer the following research questions:

User Study

5.1.2 Procedure. Participants were asked to complete both the
experimental and control tasks. To control for potential order effects,
we counterbalanced the sequence of conditions so that half of the
participants began with the experimental condition and the other
half with the baseline. We also counterbalanced the assignment of
Tasks A and B across conditions so that each task was performed
equally often under both the experimental and control settings.
Each task was limited to 30 minutes, with a five-minute break
between tasks. Before starting each task, participants received a
10-minute instruction session on how to use both corresponding
interfaces and were given an additional five minutes to practice
using the system. The study was conducted remotely via Zoom6 ,
and participants were asked to share their screens during the timed
tasks. As the final output, participants were asked to submit the top

Study Design

5.1.1 Task. We designed two tasks, Task A and Task B (Figure 12
in the appendix), in which participants improve the initial molecule
with respect to four properties (§A.5 in the appendix). The tasks
were based on two criteria: 1) versatility of the initial lead compound
and 2) applicability of the properties to real-world experimental
contexts.
First, in selecting the initial lead compound, versatility was
essential, as the study does not focus on a specific drug or disease. To ensure diverse modification attempts, we chose the most
frequent molecules from a dataset of 100,000 commercially available molecules, where property variations were generated through
fragment modification [17]. Each data instance contains a beforemolecule with its property scores and an after-molecule with updated property scores generated by fragment modification. Their
frequent occurrence indicates strong potential for diverse applications in lead optimization. We selected the top 10 instances from
the dataset.
Second, for the desired properties, we emphasized relevance
to real-world experimental contexts, where multiple properties
often involve trade-offs that make simultaneous optimization challenging. To reflect this complexity, we selected properties with
well-established trade-off relationships, specifically between PlogP
and liver toxicity. Higher PlogP values are often associated with increased metabolic load and an elevated risk of liver injury [15, 68],
thereby reflecting the difficulty of optimization in practice. We
selected two cases from the top 10 instances.

5.1

MolSynthesis (Figure 2-D and E) is designed to help users synthesize multiple strategies across clusters. The workflow proceeds as
follows:

• RQ1-1: Can HALO help researchers efficiently identify
which properties are improved or worsened by grouping
improved molecules?

6 https://www.zoom.com/

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2025, Woodstock, NY

Efficient Observation
Systematic Strategy Identification
Q1
Q2

Q3

Q4

Q5

Q6
Q7
Q8
Q9
Q10
Q11
Q12

Coherent Multi-Strategy Synthesis
Overall

The system allowed me to easily group improved
molecules by different combinations of properties.
The grouping helped me understand the overall
landscape of improved molecules.
The system helped me identify which clusters to focus on for refinement.

Anon.

HALO

The system helped me clearly identify common structural
patterns within each group of improved molecules.
The system enabled me to recognize which structural modifications
(strategy) contributed to property improvements.
The automatically extracted strategy information reduced the
need for manual or heuristic inspection of molecules.
The system allowed me to easily combine multiple optimization
strategies when designing new molecules.
The interface helped me maintain structural coherence while
recombining different strategies.
The system reduced the cognitive effort required to merge complex
optimization paths.
The system helped me intuitively create new candidate molecules by
recombining strategies from different groups.
I am satisfied with my overall experience using the system.
The final outputs met my expectations.

Table 1: Comparison of Quality and Diversity of submitted
molecules between conditions. Values indicate mean ± standard deviation (∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01).

Baseline

*
*
*

*

**

*

**

Figure 3: Bar plots showing the results of the user study.
Participants rated efficient observation (Q1-3), systematic
strategy identification (Q4-6), and cogerent multi-strategy
synthesis (Q7-10), and overall evaluation (Q11-12) for both
the baseline and HALO using a 7-point Likert scale (∗ 𝑝 < 0.05,
∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01, ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.001).

seven molecules in the first-round setting, building on the formative
study (§3.3.1).

5.1.3 Measurement. The post-condition questionnaire evaluated
three research questions (R1-1, R1-2, R1-3): efficient observation,
systematic strategy identification, coherent strategy composition,
and overall user experience. These twelve questions were developed based on insights from the formative study (§3). All questions
and results are shown in Figure 3. Users rated each task in the
survey on a 7-point Likert scale (1 is “Not at all” and 7 is “Very
much”). For RQ2, we evaluate the quality and diversity of submitted
molecules: 1) Quality, measured by how many of the four properties were improved in each submitted compound; 2) Diversity,
measured using pairwise structure similarity between submitted
molecules. For RQ3, we analyzed log data capturing abductive leaps.
Building on prior work [12], participants were instructed to click
the Insight button (Figure 2-F) whenever they experienced an abductive leap during the experimental tasks with HALO. We defined
and explained an abductive leap as a moment in which participants
form a plausible explanatory hypothesis or identify a promising
direction.
5.1.4 Participants. We recruited ten professional medicinal chemists
working in nine different drug discovery labs. Table 4 in the appendix presents the participants’ demographic information. Their
career experience ranged from 8 to 15 years (𝑀 = 10.90, 𝑆𝐷 = 2.28).
We used snowball sampling, leveraging professionals who participated in the formative study. The Institutional Review Board (IRB)
approved our study, and we obtained participants’ consent before
the study. Each participant received a $75 gift certificate.

5.2

Quality
Diversity

Baseline
2.25 ± 0.48
58.27% ± 11.01%

HALO

𝑝-value

3.16 ± 0.37
46.07% ± 7.68%

0.0039∗∗
0.0039∗∗

Metric

(Figure 3; Q1: 𝑝 < .05, Q2: 𝑝 < .05, Q3: 𝑝 < .01). Many participants
(𝑃5–𝑃6, 𝑃9–𝑃12) noted that HALO facilitated grouping of improved
molecules, enabling faster understanding of the overall landscape
and more effective identification of clusters for refinement As 𝑃5
explained, “Clustering based on the target property was pretty efficient and reasonable, and it matched how I’d group things naturally.”
𝑃9 added, “It was easy to see that the AI-generated molecules tended
to have low PlogP, which helped me understand which property to
pay closer attention to in the next phase.”

**
**
**
**

*

Results and Findings

We report findings organized by our research questions, combining
results from the user study.
5.2.1 RQ1-1: Efficient Observation. Participants using HALO
demonstrated more efficient observation rather than the baseline

5.2.2 RQ1-2: Systematic Strategy Identification. HALO significantly enhanced the systematic identification of strategies by
identifying relationship fragments and property improvement, significantly reducing the manual effort and improving diversity (Figure 3; Q4: 𝑝 < .05, Q5: 𝑝 < .01, Q6: 𝑝 < .01). Many participants
(𝑃3 –𝑃8 , 𝑃11 ) noted that HALO effectively identified rational optimization strategies that aligned with expert chemical intuition,
reducing manual labor required in traditional workflows. As 𝑃 3 explained, “When improving PlogP, it was easy to plan the optimization
direction by examining fragments that frequently appeared in clusters
of molecules with higher PlogP.” 𝑃11 further noted “The strategies provided alongside existing knowledge were generally reasonable, so we
don’t waste time in the lab, and additional literature review.” Others
found that suggesting strategies enables users to develop a hypothesis in diverse ways. 𝑃8 further noted “Instead of just going with
intuition, having multiple evidence-based strategies helped me think
of things I wouldn’t have considered and explore different directions.”

5.2.3 RQ1-3: Coherent Multi-Strategy Synthesis . HALO significantly enables participants to maintain coherence in synthesizing strategies across multiple clusters. HALO streamlined the
design of new candidates by enabling the intuitive recombination
of optimization strategies, maintaining structural coherence during the process (Figure 3; Q7: 𝑝 < .01, Q8: 𝑝 < .01, Q9: 𝑝 < .05,
Q10: 𝑝 < .05). Several noted that the modular nature of HALO provided a ’plug-and-play’ experience, allowing participants to easily
recombine various strategies while maintaining structural coherence (𝑃3 –𝑃8 , 𝑃11 –𝑃12 ). As 𝑃6 explained, “I really liked the ability to
combine fragments like LEGO blocks with just a click, while seeing
the score update in real time, which allowed me to quickly design a
variety of new molecules.” 𝑃9 added, “With ChatGPT or Gemini, if
I tried to modify multiple fragments, I would probably lose track of
the flow pretty quickly. HALO, on the other hand, helped me continuously build new combinations.” However, several participants
noted that once the optimization direction became more concrete,
HALO tended to present too many strategy suggestions, which
could feel overwhelming and hinder further refinement (𝑃8 -𝑃12 ).
As 𝑃12 remarked, “Sometimes I just want to make some very simple

HALO : Interactive Co-abductive Reasoning in Scientific Hypothesis Generation

Molecule Generated (AI)

Molecule Generated (Manual)

MolCluster

MolStrategy

MolSynthesis

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2025, Woodstock, NY

Insight

analyzed usage patterns in each phase. In the pre-leap phase, abductive leaps often emerged when participants had experienced all
three stages—efficient observation (MolCluster, , Figure 4), strategy identification (MolStrategy, , Figure 4), and multi-strategy
synthesis (MolSynthesis, , Figure 4)). In particular, during the
multi-strategy synthesis stage, participants often experienced a
series of consecutive abductive leaps, suggesting an iterative refinement and expansion of emerging hypotheses rather than a single
isolated insight. For example, 𝑃3 explained, “I first had a new idea
while trying to merge several strategies around cluster 1. Then, as I
merged additional information around clusters 2 and 3, that original
idea evolved further.” and 𝑃6 noted, “ After diving into the whole molecule and the overall strategy, the logic behind the AI’s suggestions
became clear. It actually inspired me to develop new approaches myself.” These findings suggest the importance of supporting abductive
reasoning across the three-stage cycle in HALO, while highlighting
the organic interplay and interdependence among the stages.
In the post-leap phase, for generating molecules, AI usage ( ,
Figure 4) dropped sharply (pre-leap: M=9.11, SD=4.54; post-leap:
M=1.44, SD=3.68), while manual generation ( , Figure 4) increased
(pre-leap: M=3.33, SD=2.40; post-leap: M=4.11, SD=3.76) For example, 𝑃5 explained, “Once the new idea came to mind, I wanted to refine
it using my own knowledge,” one participant noted. “For an important
task, if I triggered a new AI generation at that point, it felt like I would
have to start over from scratch.” 𝑃7 remarked, “Because I cannot
give the AI sufficiently detailed and precise instructions on my new
idea, I preferred to take the lead and refine the idea myself after that
new stage was reached.” These findings suggest that participants
primarily appropriated AI as a catalyst for initial conceptual leaps,
but once a promising idea had emerged, they tended to reclaim
control over the subsequent refinement process to preserve their
intended direction.

•

Figure 4: Each row illustrates a participant’s componentusage logs recorded during the experimental task of the user
study. Green squares represent the creation of new molecules,
either through manual edits or molecular AI generations.
Light blue circles represent MolCluster, blue circles represent
MolStrategy, and dark blue circles represent MolSynthesis.
The yellow star represents an Insight. Table 3 in the appendix
defines each label.

modifications. This tool can make suggestions for a lot of types of
analogs.”
Overall, these results for RQs (RQ1-1, RQ1-2, and RQ1-3) suggest
that HALO supports abductive reasoning in hypothesis workflows,
highlighting the suitability of HALO for such processes.

5.2.4 RQ2: Ligand Optimization . We begin the discussion of
the results with one of the most critical questions: did HALO result
in not only higher-quality but also a greater diversity in ligand
optimization? For quality, we evaluated how many of the four
properties were improved, using ADMET-AI [98], which is also
used in HALO (Δ = after − before). We employed the Wilcoxon
signed-rank test [106]. Table 1 shows that there is a significant
difference in quality between conditions (𝑝 = 0.0039).
For diversity, we computed the average pairwise similarity within
each set (where each participant submitted seven molecules), and
then compared between conditions using the Wilcoxon rank-sum
test [106]. Specifically, for a set of 𝑁 molecules, the diversity score
is defined as:

𝑁

1 ∑︁ 1 ∑︁
𝐴𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑆𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑙𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦 =
sim(𝑚𝑖 , 𝑚 𝑗 )
𝑁 𝑖=1 𝑁 𝑗≠𝑖

•

•

Discussion

In this section, we reflect on our findings from the design and
evaluation of HALO. We also discuss design implications and future
opportunities for improving and extending HALO.

!
(1)

6.1

where 𝑚𝑖 and 𝑚 𝑗 denote molecules in the set, sim(·, ·) represents
Tanimoto similarity [94] between two molecules, and 𝑁 is the
number of molecules in the set (i.e., 𝑁 = 7 in our study). Table 1
shows that there is a significant difference in diversity between
conditions (𝑝 = 0.0039).
Overall, these results suggest that HALO supports users in achieving both higher-quality optimization and more diverse exploration,
highlighting its potential to facilitate the generation of novel and
promising hypotheses.

Design Implication 1: Generalizing
HALO-Co-abduction in Scientific Discovery

We introduce a co-abduction framework that enables abductive
reasoning in human–AI collaboration, incorporating three stages:
(1) efficient observation, (2) strategy identification, and (3) multistrategy synthesis. Our work addresses a critical challenge in generating scientific hypotheses within a vast hypothesis space, where
the cognitive leap from fragmented observations to a coherent,
unified hypothesis remains a significant manual burden for researchers [2, 109]. HALO enables users to explore improved candidates in vast molecular spaces, organize them into meaningful
groups, explain the reasons for their improvements, and identify,
refine, and combine optimization strategies across these groups.
Understanding the mechanisms behind optimization strategies
and easily combining multiple strategies significantly enhances
researchers’ sense of control, transparency, trust, and alignment
with creative intent in scientific discovery, supporting core principles of human-AI interaction [48, 87, 92, 107].

5.2.5 RQ3: Abductive Leaps. To answer RQ3, we analyzed the
usage log of HALO and the usage pattern associated with abductive
leaps. Figure 4 shows participants’ component usage log during
the experimental task. Participants reported on average 1.8 (SD
= 0.92) abductive leaps (min: 0, max: 3) in usage of HALO based
on the log of the Insight button (Figure 2-F). We defined pre- and
post-leap phases based on the first detected abductive leap and

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2025, Woodstock, NY

Anon.

Beyond drug discovery, HALO ’s implementation can be directly
applied to other complex scientific domains that require abductive reasoning to generate promising hypotheses. For example, in
battery materials design, researchers must generate candidate compositions that balance multiple properties, such as energy density
and cycle life. Using AI, a large set of candidate materials can be
generated under these competing constraints. These candidates can
then be grouped by combinations of improved properties, enabling
efficient observation of trade-off patterns. From these clusters, researchers can identify common design strategies, such as increasing
nickel content to improve energy density or introducing dopants
to enhance stability. Users can further combine multiple strategies
across clusters to generate new hypotheses.

sense-making rather than using AI afterward. These differences in
AI usage suggest a phase-dependent initiative in human–AI collaboration. Before insight, AI can have initiative comparable to that
of humans, proactively supporting the iterative cycles of divergent
and convergent thinking by understanding the user’s needs and
enabling progress toward a crystallized explanatory framework.
After insight, the initiative shifts back to the human, and AI should
adopt a more restrained, responsive role. Since scientists focus on
fine-grained modifications, AI that does not fully understand the
precise context may interfere with their work.
Making users’ insight states transparent may help HCI researchers
design AI roles in scientific discovery interfaces, aligning with the
core principle of human-AI collaboration, where humans retain
initiative over core tasks [4, 104]. For example, if users share their
experiences of abductive leaps with the AI during a session, the AI
can reduce its intrusiveness in later phases by aligning with user
input when needed, thereby facilitating human-AI interaction.

6.2

Design Implication 2: Constraint-based
Interaction in Scientific Domains

While general creative domains operate under loose constraints,
scientific hypothesis generation is validity-bound. In creative domains, AI often helps users break creative ruts by offering divergent
options [27, 67]; even structurally imperfect outputs can inspire
new ideas. Jeon et al. [47] reported that automotive designers applied twisted and blurred AI-generated designs as inspiration for
new designs. In such contexts, imperfections serve as sources of
novelty. However, in the scientific domain, novel discoveries must
be firmly grounded in accurate factual data. If generated outputs
violate domain constraints, they cannot advance further iterations
with AI. Therefore, AI systems should provide sufficient explanatory support—either through transparent generation processes (e.g.,
explainable models[69, 80]) or through result-level evidence (e.g.,
supporting literature [62]. For example, in the biomedical domain,
AI recommendations must align with evidence-based guidelines,
regulatory standards, and patient-safety requirements, as systems
that produce clinically invalid or unsafe advice cannot be deployed
in practice [32, 95]. In computer engineering, generative AI utility
is bounded by executability [14, 52, 101]; code must be syntactically
correct and functionally valid within existing dependencies and
test cases. In architecture, outputs are governed by physical laws,
structural feasibility, and safety regulations [33, 66].

6.3

6.4

Limitation and Future Work

First, evaluating the quality of compounds generated by HALO
solely using model-based scores and counts is inherently limited.
Definitive assessment requires scientific validation through wetlab experiments. However, such experiments are costly, with approximately $2,500 per compound, making large-scale validation
impractical within the scope of this study. In future work, we plan
to integrate experimentally validated datasets as ground truth, enabling more rigorous evaluation in lead optimization with HALO.
Second, both the duration of the user study (30 minutes) and the
size of the participant pool (N = 10) limit the generalizability of
our findings. While participants were able to discover several highquality compound candidates in a short timeframe, in real-world
practice, identifying compounds typically takes at least a week.
Moreover, although ten participants completed expert studies, the
sample may not fully represent the diversity of the drug discovery
domain. For future work, by collaborating with more diverse drug
discovery labs, we aim to conduct long-term user studies (at least
one week) to enhance the generalizability of HALO.

Conclusion

In this paper, we present the Co-abduction framework, a novel
approach to human-AI collaboration for abductive reasoning and
the generation of new, promising hypotheses. To operationalize
this framework, we developed HALO, which supports co-abductive
reasoning through three stages in ligand optimization: 1) efficient
observation, 2) systematic strategy identification, and 3) coherent
multi-strategy synthesis. Results from a study involving 10 domain
experts demonstrate that HALO facilitates abductive reasoning
and supports the generation of higher-quality, more diverse hypotheses, demonstrating its applicability to scientific domains that
require novel and promising hypotheses, including materials science, biology, and chemistry. Our work offers a new perspective
on supporting hypothesis generation, emphasizing the importance
of abductive reasoning in human-AI collaboration.

Design Implication 3: Before and After
Abductive Leaps

The purpose of co-abduction is to facilitate an abductive leap in
which a scientist suddenly reconfigures the problem space into
a new, promising hypothesis [31, 56], such as an Aha! or eureka
moment. [34, 73]. Previous research has demonstrated that scientific approaches differ before and after the abductive leap [34, 73].
Prior to the insight, scientists engage in iterative cycles of divergent
thinking. They use technology to broadly explore the hypothesis
space and iteratively build local conceptual contexts, continuing
until scientists perceive sufficiently promising cognitive breakthroughs have emerged [30, 56, 71]. Post-insight, the cognitive
regime shifts: convergent thinking becomes dominant as scientists
focus on refining and optimizing these ideas to meet predefined
objectives [30, 56].
In our results, while scientists often use AI to help form a promising explanatory frame beforehand, they rely on domain-specific

HALO : Interactive Co-abductive Reasoning in Scientific Hypothesis Generation

References

[1] [n. d.]. Nvida - bionemo. https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/clara/bionemo/. Accessed: 2024-07-31.
[2] Atilla Kaan Alkan, Shashwat Sourav, Maja Jablonska, Simone Astarita, Rishabh
Chakrabarty, Nikhil Garuda, Pranav Khetarpal, Maciej Pióro, Dimitrios Tanoglidis, Kartheik G Iyer, et al. 2025. A Survey on Hypothesis Generation for
Scientific Discovery in the Era of Large Language Models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.05496 (2025).
[3] Dana F AlKharboush, Frank Kozielski, Geoffrey Wells, and Exequiel OJ Porta.
2025. Fragment-based drug discovery: A graphical review. Current Research in
Pharmacology and Drug Discovery (2025), 100233.
[4] Saleema Amershi, Dan Weld, Mihaela Vorvoreanu, Adam Fourney, Besmira
Nushi, Penny Collisson, Jina Suh, Shamsi Iqbal, Paul N Bennett, Kori Inkpen,
et al. 2019. Guidelines for human-AI interaction. In Proceedings of the 2019 chi
conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–13.
[5] Sara Barrena and Jaime Nubiola. 2019. Abduction: The Logic of Creativity. In
The Bloomsbury Companion to Contemporary Peircean Semiotics. Bloomsbury,
185–203.
[6] Helen M. Berman et al. 2000. The Protein Data Bank. Nucleic Acids Research 28,
1 (2000), 235–242.
[7] G Richard Bickerton, Gaia V Paolini, Jérémy Besnard, Sorel Muresan, and
Andrew L Hopkins. 2012. Quantifying the chemical beauty of drugs. Nature
chemistry 4, 2 (2012), 90–98.
[8] Camille Bilodeau, Wengong Jin, Tommi Jaakkola, Regina Barzilay, and Klavs F
Jensen. 2022. Generative models for molecular discovery: Recent advances and
challenges. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational Molecular Science
12, 5 (2022), e1608.
[9] Jesse D Bloom, Sy T Labthavikul, Christopher R Otey, and Frances H Arnold.
2006. Protein stability promotes evolvability. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103, 15 (2006), 5869–5874.
[10] Paul E Blower Jr, Kevin P Cross, Michael A Fligner, Glenn J Myatt, Joseph S
Verducci, and Chihae Yang. 2004. Systematic analysis of large screening sets in
drug discovery. Current Drug Discovery Technologies 1, 1 (2004), 37–47.
[11] Keith T Butler, Daniel W Davies, Hugh Cartwright, Olexandr Isayev, and Aron
Walsh. 2018. Machine learning for molecular and materials science. Nature 559,
7715 (2018), 547–555.
[12] Wesley Carpenter. 2019. The aha! moment: The science behind creative insights.
In Toward super-creativity-improving creativity in humans, machines, and humanmachine collaborations. IntechOpen.
[13] Fengming Chen, Ranran Zhao, Xingxing Han, Huan Li, and Zhishu Tang. 2026.
Harnessing AI to fuse phenotypic signatures for drug target identification:
progress in computational modeling. Briefings in Bioinformatics 27, 1 (2026),
bbag045.
[14] Mark Chen. 2021. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2107.03374 (2021).
[15] Minjun Chen, Jürgen Borlak, and Weida Tong. 2013. High lipophilicity and
high daily dose of oral medications are associated with significant risk for
drug-induced liver injury. Hepatology 58, 1 (2013), 388–396.
[16] Minjun Chen, Ayako Suzuki, Jürgen Borlak, Raúl J Andrade, and M Isabel
Lucena. 2015. Drug-induced liver injury: Interactions between drug properties
and host factors. Journal of hepatology 63, 2 (2015), 503–514.
[17] Ziqi Chen, Martin Renqiang Min, Srinivasan Parthasarathy, and Xia Ning.
2021. A deep generative model for molecule optimization via one fragment
modification. Nature machine intelligence 3, 12 (2021), 1040–1049.
[18] José A Cisneros, Michael J Robertson, Brandon Q Mercado, and William L
Jorgensen. 2017. Systematic study of effects of structural modifications on the
aqueous solubility of drug-like molecules. ACS medicinal chemistry letters 8, 1
(2017), 124–127.
[19] Victoria Clarke, Virginia Braun, and Nikki Hayfield. 2015. Thematic analysis.
Qualitative Psychology: A Practical Guide to Research Methods (2015), 222–248.
[20] Kai-Hendrik Cohrs, Emiliano Diaz, Vasileios Sitokonstantinou, Gherardo
Varando, and Gustau Camps-Valls. 2025. Large language models for causal
hypothesis generation in science. Machine Learning: Science and Technology 6,
1 (2025), 013001.
[21] The UniProt Consortium. 2023. UniProt: the Universal Protein Knowledgebase
in 2023. Nucleic Acids Research 51, D1 (2023), D523–D531.
[22] Gabriele Corso, Hannes Stärk, Bowen Jing, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola.
2022. Diffdock: Diffusion steps, twists, and turns for molecular docking. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2210.01776 (2022).
[23] Stefano Curtarolo et al. 2012. AFLOW: an automatic framework for highthroughput materials discovery. Computational Materials Science 58 (2012),
218–226.
[24] Daniel W Davies, Keith T Butler, Adam J Jackson, Andrew Morris, Jarvist M
Frost, Jonathan M Skelton, and Aron Walsh. 2016. Computational screening of
all stoichiometric inorganic materials. Chem 1, 4 (2016), 617–627.
[25] Vishal Dey, Xiao Hu, and Xia Ning. 2025. GeLLM3 O: Generalizing Large
Language Models for Multi-property Molecule Optimization. arXiv preprint

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2025, Woodstock, NY

arXiv:2502.13398 (2025).
[26] Vishal Dey, Xiao Hu, and Xia Ning. 2025. Large Language Models for Controllable Multi-property Multi-objective Molecule Optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.23987 (2025).
[27] Chris Donahue and Yewon Kim. 2025. AMUSE: AI-Integrated Songwriting
Workflows. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems.
[28] Jurgen Drews. 2000. Drug discovery: a historical perspective. science 287, 5460
(2000), 1960–1964.
[29] David TF Dryden, Andrew R Thomson, and John H White. 2008. How much
of protein sequence space has been explored by life on Earth? Journal of The
Royal Society Interface 5, 25 (2008), 953–956.
[30] Kevin Dunbar. 1993. Concept discovery in a scientific domain. Cognitive science
17, 3 (1993), 397–434.
[31] Kevin Dunbar. 1995. How scientists really reason: Scientific reasoning in realworld laboratories. (1995).
[32] Malek Elhaddad and Sara Hamam. 2024. AI-driven clinical decision support
systems: an ongoing pursuit of potential. Cureus 16, 4 (2024), e57728.
[33] Faraz Faruqi, Yingtao Tian, Vrushank Phadnis, Varun Jampani, and Stefanie
Mueller. 2024. Shaping realities: Enhancing 3D generative AI with fabrication
constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.10142 (2024).
[34] Anna Fedor, Eörs Szathmáry, and Michael Öllinger. 2015. Problem solving
stages in the five square problem. Frontiers in psychology 6 (2015), 1050.
[35] Jacob G Foster, Andrey Rzhetsky, and James A Evans. 2015. Tradition and
innovation in scientists’ research strategies. American sociological review 80, 5
(2015), 875–908.
[36] Jie Gao, Yuchen Guo, Gionnieve Lim, Tianqin Zhang, Zheng Zhang, Toby
Jia-Jun Li, and Simon Tangi Perrault. 2024. CollabCoder: A Lower-barrier,
Rigorous Workflow for Inductive Collaborative Qualitative Analysis with Large
Language Models. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems. 1–29.
[37] Massimo Garbuio and Nidthida Lin. 2021. Innovative idea generation in problem finding: Abductive reasoning, cognitive impediments, and the promise of
artificial intelligence. Journal of Product Innovation Management 38, 6 (2021),
701–725.
[38] Anna Gaulton et al. 2012. ChEMBL: a large-scale bioactivity database for drug
discovery. Nucleic Acids Research 40, D1 (2012), D1100–D1107.
[39] Zhangxu He, Weiguang Yang, Feifei Yang, Jingyu Zhang, and Liying Ma. 2024.
Innovative medicinal chemistry strategies for enhancing drug solubility. European Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 279 (2024), 116842.
[40] Izumi V Hinkson, Benjamin Madej, and Eric A Stahlberg. 2020. Accelerating
therapeutics for opportunities in medicine: a paradigm shift in drug discovery.
Frontiers in pharmacology 11 (2020), 770.
[41] David Hitchcock. 1979. Deductive and inductive: Types of validity, not types of
argument. Informal Logic 2, 3 (1979).
[42] Samuel C Hoffman, Vijil Chenthamarakshan, Kahini Wadhawan, Pin-Yu Chen,
and Payel Das. 2022. Optimizing molecules using efficient queries from property
evaluations. Nature Machine Intelligence 4, 1 (2022), 21–31.
[43] Tom Hosack, Djamil Damry, and Sujata Biswas. 2023. Drug-induced liver injury:
a comprehensive review. Therapeutic advances in gastroenterology 16 (2023),
17562848231163410.
[44] Ross Irwin, Spyridon Dimitriadis, Jiazhen He, and Esben Jannik Bjerrum. 2022.
Chemformer: a pre-trained transformer for computational chemistry. Machine
Learning: Science and Technology 3, 1 (2022), 015022.
[45] Anubhav Jain, Shyue Ping Ong, Geoffroy Hautier, Wei Chen, William Davidson
Richards, Stephen Dacek, Shreyas Cholia, Dan Gunter, David Skinner, Gerbrand
Ceder, et al. 2013. Commentary: The Materials Project: A materials genome
approach to accelerating materials innovation. APL materials 1, 1 (2013).
[46] Pouria Jandaghi, Hamed S Najafabadi, Andrea S Bauer, Andreas I Papadakis,
Matteo Fassan, Anita Hall, Anie Monast, Magnus von Knebel Doeberitz, John P
Neoptolemos, Eithne Costello, et al. 2016. Expression of DRD2 is increased in
human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and inhibitors slow tumor growth in
mice. Gastroenterology 151, 6 (2016), 1218–1231.
[47] Youngseung Jeon, Matthew K Hong, Yan-Ying Chen, Kalani Murakami,
Jonathan Q Li, Xiang Anthony Chen, and Matthew Klenk. 2024. Weaving
ml with human aesthetic assessments to augment design space exploration: An
automotive wheel design case study. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–10.
[48] Tingting Jiang, Zhumo Sun, Shiting Fu, and Yan Lv. 2024. Human-AI interaction research agenda: A user-centered perspective. Data and Information
Management 8, 4 (2024), 100078.
[49] John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov,
Olaf Ronneberger, Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool, Russ Bates, Augustin Žídek,
Anna Potapenko, et al. 2021. Highly accurate protein structure prediction with
AlphaFold. nature 596, 7873 (2021), 583–589.
[50] Hyeonsu B Kang, Nouran Soliman, Matt Latzke, Joseph Chee Chang, and
Jonathan Bragg. 2023. ComLittee: Literature Discovery with Personal Elected

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2025, Woodstock, NY

Anon.

Author Committees. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems. 1–20.
[51] Abdul Karim, Matthew Lee, Thomas Balle, and Abdul Sattar. 2021. CardioTox
net: a robust predictor for hERG channel blockade based on deep learning
meta-feature ensembles. Journal of Cheminformatics 13, 1 (2021), 60.
[52] Majeed Kazemitabaar, Justin Chow, Carl Ka To Ma, Barbara J Ericson, David
Weintrop, and Tovi Grossman. 2023. Studying the effect of AI code generators
on supporting novice learners in introductory programming. In Proceedings of
the 2023 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–23.
[53] Nabin Khanal, Chun Meng Yu, Jui-Cheng Chiu, Anav Chaudhary, Ziyue Zhang,
Kakani Katija, and Angus G Forbes. 2024. FathomGPT: A natural language
interface for interactively exploring ocean science data. In Proceedings of the
37th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. 1–15.
[54] Sunghwan Kim et al. 2021. PubChem in 2021: new data content and improved
web interfaces. Nucleic Acids Research 49, D1 (2021), D1388–D1395.
[55] Douglas B Kitchen, Hélène Decornez, John R Furr, and Jürgen Bajorath. 2004.
Docking and scoring in virtual screening for drug discovery: methods and
applications. Nature reviews Drug discovery 3, 11 (2004), 935–949.
[56] David Klahr and Kevin Dunbar. 1988. Dual space search during scientific
reasoning. Cognitive science 12, 1 (1988), 1–48.
[57] Paris Koloveas, Serafeim Chatzopoulos, Dionysis Diamantis, Christos Tryfonopoulos, and Thanasis Vergoulis. 2025. Accelerating Scientific Discovery
with Multi-Document Summarization of Impact-Ranked Papers. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2508.03962 (2025).
[58] Ehud Kroll and Lauri Koskela. 2017. Studying design abduction in the context of
novelty. In DS 87-7 Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Engineering
Design (ICED 17) Vol 7: Design Theory and Research Methodology, Vancouver,
Canada, 21-25.08. 2017. The Design Society, 61–70.
[59] Yoonjoo Lee, Hyeonsu B Kang, Matt Latzke, Juho Kim, Jonathan Bragg,
Joseph Chee Chang, and Pao Siangliulue. 2024. PaperWeaver: Enriching Topical
Paper Alerts by Contextualizing Recommended Papers with User-collected
Papers. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. 1–19.
[60] Ziwen Li, Xiang Chen, and Youngseung Jeon. 2025. GraPPI: a retrieve-dividesolve GraphRAG framework for large-scale protein-protein interaction exploration. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025.
3635–3648.
[61] Junyong Lin, Lu Dai, Ruiqian Han, Yijie Sui, Ruilin Wang, Xingliang Sun, Qinglin
Wu, Min Feng, Hao Liu, and Hui Xiong. 2025. ScIRGen: Synthesize Realistic and
Large-Scale RAG Dataset for Scientific Research. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM
SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining V. 2. 5619–5630.
[62] Haokun Liu, Yangqiaoyu Zhou, Mingxuan Li, Chenfei Yuan, and Chenhao Tan.
2025. Literature meets data: A synergistic approach to hypothesis generation.
In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). 245–281.
[63] Yiren Liu, Pranav Sharma, Mehul Oswal, Haijun Xia, and Yun Huang. 2025.
PersonaFlow: Designing LLM-Simulated Expert Perspectives for Enhanced
Research Ideation. In Proceedings of the 2025 ACM Designing Interactive Systems
Conference. 1–29.
[64] Ricardo Macarron, Martyn N Banks, Dejan Bojanic, David J Burns, Dragan A
Cirovic, Tina Garyantes, Darren VS Green, Robert P Hertzberg, William P
Janzen, Jeff W Paslay, et al. 2011. Impact of high-throughput screening in
biomedical research. Nature reviews Drug discovery 10, 3 (2011), 188–195.
[65] Gerald Maggiora, Martin Vogt, Dagmar Stumpfe, and Jurgen Bajorath. 2014.
Molecular similarity in medicinal chemistry: miniperspective. Journal of medicinal chemistry 57, 8 (2014), 3186–3204.
[66] Liane Makatura, Michael Foshey, Bohan Wang, Felix Hähnlein, Pingchuan
Ma, Bolei Deng, Megan Tjandrasuwita, Andrew Spielberg, Crystal Owens,
Peter Yichen Chen, et al. 2024. How can large language models help humans in
design and manufacturing? Part 2: Synthesizing an end-to-end LLM-enabled
design and manufacturing workflow. Harvard Data Science Review Special Issue
5 (2024).
[67] Nikolas Martelaro, David Chuan-En Lin, and Hyeonsu B. Kang. 2025. Inkspire: A
Sketch-Driven AI Tool for Design Ideation. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
[68] Kristin McEuen, Jürgen Borlak, Weida Tong, and Minjun Chen. 2017. Associations of drug lipophilicity and extent of metabolism with drug-induced liver
injury. International journal of molecular sciences 18, 7 (2017), 1335.
[69] G Mengaldo. 2025. Explainable AI and the Scientific Method: InterpretabilityGuided Knowledge Discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.10557 v5 (2025).
[70] Gordon E Moore et al. 1965. Cramming more components onto integrated
circuits.
[71] Stellan Ohlsson. 1992. Information-processing explanations of insight and
related phenomena. Advances in the psychology of thinking 1 (1992), 1–44.
[72] Charles O’Neill, Tirthankar Ghosal, Roberta Răileanu, Mike Walmsley, Thang
Bui, Kevin Schawinski, and Ioana Ciucă. 2025. Sparks of science: Hypothesis
generation using structured paper data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.12976 (2025).

[73] Antonio J Osuna-Mascaró and Alice MI Auersperg. 2021. Current understanding
of the “insight” phenomenon across disciplines. Frontiers in Psychology 12 (2021),
791398.
[74] Sami Paavola. 2004. Abduction as a logic and methodology of discovery: The
importance of strategies. Foundations of Science 9, 3 (2004), 267–283.
[75] Charles Sanders Peirce. 1934. Collected papers of charles sanders peirce. Vol. 5.
Harvard University Press.
[76] Pavel G Polishchuk, Timur I Madzhidov, and Alexandre Varnek. 2013. Estimation
of the size of drug-like chemical space based on GDB-17 data. Journal of
computer-aided molecular design 27, 8 (2013), 675–679.
[77] Robert Pool. 2024. AI for Scientific Discovery: Proceedings of a Workshop.
(2024).
[78] Jason Portenoy, Marissa Radensky, Jevin D West, Eric Horvitz, Daniel S Weld,
and Tom Hope. 2022. Bursting scientific filter bubbles: Boosting innovation via
novel author discovery. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. 1–13.
[79] Kevin Pu, K. J. Kevin Feng, Tovi Grossman, Tom Hope, Bhavana Dalvi Mishra,
Matt Latzke, Jonathan Bragg, Joseph Chee Chang, and Pao Siangliulue. 2025.
IdeaSynth: Iterative Research Idea Development Through Evolving and Composing Idea Facets with Literature-Grounded Feedback. In Proceedings of the
2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–31.
[80] Yazdan Ahmad Qadri, Sibhghatulla Shaikh, Khurshid Ahmad, Inho Choi,
Sung Won Kim, and Athansios V Vasilakos. 2025. Explainable artificial intelligence: a perspective on drug discovery. Pharmaceutics 17, 9 (2025), 1119.
[81] Biqing Qi, Kaiyan Zhang, Kai Tian, Haoxiang Li, Zhang-Ren Chen, Sihang
Zeng, Ermo Hua, Hu Jinfang, and Bowen Zhou. 2024. Large language models as
biomedical hypothesis generators: a comprehensive evaluation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.08940 (2024).
[82] Carveth Read. 1914. Logic, deductive and inductive. A. Moring.
[83] Zhi Ren et al. 2022. MaterialsAtlas.org: a materials informatics web app. npj
Computational Materials 8, 1 (2022), 77.
[84] Jutta Schickore. 2014. Scientific discovery. (2014).
[85] Ansgar Schuffenhauer, Peter Ertl, Silvio Roggo, Stefan Wetzel, Marcus A Koch,
and Herbert Waldmann. 2007. The scaffold tree- visualization of the scaffold
universe by hierarchical scaffold classification. Journal of chemical information
and modeling 47, 1 (2007), 47–58.
[86] Christian D Schunn and David Klahr. 1995. A 4-space model of scientific
discovery. In Proceedings of the 17th annual conference of the cognitive science
society. Psychology Press Hove, 106–111.
[87] Lisa Schut, Nenad Tomašev, Thomas McGrath, Demis Hassabis, Ulrich Paquet,
and Been Kim. 2025. Bridging the human–ai knowledge gap through concept
discovery and transfer in alphazero. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 122, 13 (2025), e2406675122.
[88] Austin D Sendek, Qian Yang, Ekin D Cubuk, Karel-Alexander N Duerloo, Yi
Cui, and Evan J Reed. 2017. Holistic computational structure screening of more
than 12000 candidates for solid lithium-ion conductor materials. Energy &
Environmental Science 10, 1 (2017), 306–320.
[89] Timothy Shanahan. 2022. Deductive and inductive arguments. (2022).
[90] Mahsa Sheikholeslami, Navid Mazrouei, Yousof Gheisari, Afshin Fasihi, Matin
Irajpour, and Ali Motahharynia. 2025. DrugGen enhances drug discovery with
large language models and reinforcement learning. Scientific Reports 15, 1 (2025),
13445.
[91] Chuhan Shi, Fei Nie, Yicheng Hu, Yige Xu, Lei Chen, Xiaojuan Ma, and Qiong
Luo. 2022. MedChemLens: An interactive visual tool to support direction
selection in interdisciplinary experimental research of medicinal chemistry.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 29, 1 (2022), 63–73.
[92] Chuhan Shi, Xiaoquan Ren, Yifang Wang, Junze Li, Yushi Sun, Yawen Luo, and
Rui Sheng. 2026. A Survey of Human-AI Collaboration for Scientific Discovery.
(2026).
[93] Herbert A Simon. 2019. The Sciences of the Artificial, reissue of the third edition
with a new introduction by John Laird. MIT press.
[94] Robert R Sokal and Peter Henry Andrews Sneath. 1963. Principles of numerical
taxonomy. (1963).
[95] Kacper Sokol, James Fackler, and Julia E Vogt. 2025. Artificial intelligence
should genuinely support clinical reasoning and decision making to bridge the
translational gap. npj Digital Medicine 8, 1 (2025), 345.
[96] Yuchen Sun, Tingjun Hou, Xibing He, Viet Hoang Man, and Junmei Wang.
2023. Development and test of highly accurate endpoint free energy methods.
2: Prediction of logarithm of n-octanol–water partition coefficient (logP) for
druglike molecules using MM-PBSA method. Journal of computational chemistry
44, 13 (2023), 1300–1311.
[97] Yifei Sun, Mahmood Zabihi, Qi Li, Xiaosi Li, Brandon J Kim, Eroboghene E
Ubogu, Srinivasa N Raja, Ursula Wesselmann, and Chao Zhao. 2023. Drug
permeability: From the blood–brain barrier to the peripheral nerve barriers.
Advanced therapeutics 6, 4 (2023), 2200150.
[98] Kyle Swanson, Parker Walther, Jeremy Leitz, Souhrid Mukherjee, Joseph C Wu,
Rabindra V Shivnaraine, and James Zou. 2024. ADMET-AI: a machine learning
ADMET platform for evaluation of large-scale chemical libraries. Bioinformatics

HALO : Interactive Co-abductive Reasoning in Scientific Hypothesis Generation

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2025, Woodstock, NY

40, 7 (2024), btae416.
[99] Martin Tik, Ronald Sladky, Caroline Di Bernardi Luft, David Willinger, André
Hoffmann, Michael J Banissy, Joydeep Bhattacharya, and Christian Windischberger. 2018. Ultra-high-field fMRI insights on insight: Neural correlates of
the Aha!-moment. Human brain mapping 39, 8 (2018), 3241–3252.
[100] Nobuhiko Tokuriki and Dan S Tawfik. 2009. Stability effects of mutations and
protein evolvability. Current opinion in structural biology 19, 5 (2009), 596–604.
[101] Priyan Vaithilingam, Tianyi Zhang, and Elena L Glassman. 2022. Expectation
vs. experience: Evaluating the usability of code generation tools powered by
large language models. In Chi conference on human factors in computing systems
extended abstracts. 1–7.
[102] Jan Willem van der Laan, Peter Kasper, Beatriz Silva Lima, David R Jones, and
Markku Pasanen. 2016. Critical analysis of carcinogenicity study outcomes.
Relationship with pharmacological properties. Critical Reviews in Toxicology
46, 7 (2016), 587–614.
[103] Mario Veen. 2021. Creative Leaps in Theory: The Might of Abduction. Advances
in Health Sciences Education 26, 3 (2021), 1173–1183. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10459-020-10017-5
[104] Danding Wang, Qian Yang, Ashraf Abdul, and Brian Y Lim. 2019. Designing theory-driven user-centric explainable AI. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI
conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–15.
[105] David Weininger. 1988. SMILES, a chemical language and information system. 1. Introduction to methodology and encoding rules. Journal of chemical
information and computer sciences 28, 1 (1988), 31–36.
[106] Frank Wilcoxon. 1945. Individual comparisons by ranking methods. Biometrics
Bulletin 1, 6 (1945), 80–83. https://doi.org/10.2307/3001968
[107] Uta Wilkens, Daniel Lupp, and Valentin Langholf. 2023. Configurations of
human-centered AI at work: seven actor-structure engagements in organizations. Frontiers in artificial intelligence 6 (2023), 1272159.
[108] Olivier J Wouters, Martin McKee, and Jeroen Luyten. 2020. Estimated research
and development investment needed to bring a new medicine to market, 20092018. Jama 323, 9 (2020), 844–853.
[109] Hector Zenil, Jesper Tegnér, Felipe S Abrahão, Alexander Lavin, Vipin Kumar,
Jeremy G Frey, Adrian Weller, Larisa Soldatova, Alan R Bundy, Nicholas R
Jennings, et al. 2026. The future of fundamental science led by generative
closed-loop artificial intelligence. Frontiers in artificial intelligence 9 (2026),
1678539.
[110] Chengbo Zheng, Yuanhao Zhang, Zeyu Huang, Chuhan Shi, Minrui Xu, and
Xiaojuan Ma. 2024. DiscipLink: Unfolding Interdisciplinary Information Seeking
Process via Human-AI Co-Exploration. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual ACM
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. 1–20.
[111] Yangqiaoyu Zhou, Haokun Liu, Tejes Srivastava, Hongyuan Mei, and Chenhao
Tan. 2024. Hypothesis generation with large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.04326 (2024).

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2025, Woodstock, NY

Anon.

A Appendix
A.1 Background & Definitions of Key
Terminology

A.2

Molecule Generation Pipeline

In this section, we provide background on lead optimization and
define key terminology to aid understanding.

Initial Lead Compound

Optimization Task

Core scaffold

Preserved central structure
of a compound that is critical
for its biological activity

Ligand Optimization

Generation Pipeline

Molecule that interacts with target protein at
its binding site and may modulate its biological
function (e.g., inhibition or activation).

Prompt Construction

LLM Generation

Filter and Validation

Generated Compounds (Candidates)
ADMET Prediction

Carcinogenicity 

00.00

Drug Induced Liver Injury
 00.00

hERG Blocking

00.00

DRD2 Receptor

00.00

Pharmacological properties

R-group

Variable fragments attached to a
compound’s core scaffold that can be
systematically modified to augment
pharmacological properties

Include pharmacokinetic (ADME)
characteristics—describing absorption,
distribution, metabolism, and excretion—
and toxicity profiles that capture harmful
effects such as liver damage (trade-off).

Figure 6: Overview of the compound generation pipeline.
Users select an optimization task, which is used to construct a prompt for Llama 3.1 8B-Instruct fine-tuned on CMuMOInstruct [25]. Generated compounds are filtered and
scored before display.

Figure 5: Description of key terminologies for compound
optimization, including lead compound, pharmacological
properties, core scaffold, and r-group.

Figure 6 illustrates the molecule generation pipeline. Users select a
source molecule and choose an optimization task from predefined
profiles that group ADMET properties by therapeutic relevance.
Users can modify the molecular structure and review physicochemical properties in a web-based chemical editor before initiating
generation.
The system constructs a structured prompt encoding the source
molecule as a SMILES string alongside the task’s property targets
and optimization directions (Figure 13). The prompt is processed
by Llama 3.1 8B-Instruct fine-tuned on C-MuMOInstruct [25], an
instruction-tuning dataset for controllable multi-property molecule
optimization. The model generates multiple candidate SMILES per
request. Output SMILES are validated, canonicalized, and deduplicated via RDKit.
Each candidate undergoes a maximum common substructure (MCS)
filter to ensure scaffold preservation. The MCS between candidate
and source is computed using RDKit’s FMCS algorithm with wholering and ring-bond-type constraints. Candidates whose MCS covers
less than 60% of the source’s heavy atoms are discarded:

Ligand Optimization. Medicinal chemists generate molecular
candidates (hypotheses) for wet-lab testing by designing an initial
molecule that simultaneously improves multiple pharmacological
properties with trade-off, including absorption (e.g., PlogP [96]),
toxicity (e.g., LIVER [16]), and blood–brain barrier permeability
(e.g., BBBP [97]).
Ligand. A small molecule that interacts with a target protein
at its binding site and may modulate its biological function (e.g.,
inhibition or activation) [55]. Through high-throughput screening
(HTS)—a rapid experimental method for testing large numbers of
compounds-medicinal chemists identify those with high binding
affinity to a target protein and desired biological activity [64].
Pharmacological Properties. Pharmacological properties include pharmacokinetic (ADME) characteristics—describing absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion—and toxicity profiles
that capture harmful effects such as liver damage (trade-off). For
example, increasing solubility—the extent to which a drug dissolves
in water or biological fluids—may simultaneously raise liver or
cardiac toxicity, leading to adverse side effects [15, 68].
Core Scaffold. Core scaffold refers to the preserved central
structure of a compound that is critical for its biological activity.
Therefore, medicinal researchers maintain the core while generating new compounds [85].
R-Group. R-groups are the variable fragments attached to a
compound’s core scaffold that can be systematically modified to
augment pharmacological properties [65].



|MCS(𝑚, source)|
retained = 𝑚 ∈ candidates
≥ 0.6
|source|

Retained candidates are scored using ADMET-AI [98] (carcinogenicity, hERG, DILI) and Therapeutic Data Commons oracles
(DRD2, pLogP), alongside RDKit-computed physicochemical descriptors and drug-likeness metrics. Each candidate is rendered on
the canvas as a child node linked to its source by a generation edge.

HALO : Interactive Co-abductive Reasoning in Scientific Hypothesis Generation

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2025, Woodstock, NY

Table 2: Computational evaluation of compound generation across scaffold types and tasks.

Any Property Success (%)

Hallucination Rate (%)

Scaffold Preservation (%)

Scaffold Type

Task A

Task B

Task A

Task B

Task A

Task B

Bemis-Murcko (murcko)a
Ring System (ring only)b
Exact Structure (full molecule)c

72.3
79.3
73.8

100.0
100.0
100.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

38.3
29.7
39.8

89.8
93.8
90.6

100.0
100.0
100.0

a Bemis-Murcko scaffold: the core ring structure with linkers, removing side chains.

b Ring system: only ring atoms are preserved.

from our user study tasks. Task A optimized CARC, hERG, DILI, and
pLogP, a combination absent from training data (out-of-distribution).
Task B optimized DRD2, DILI, pLogP, and QED, matching training
distribution (in-distribution). We generated 1,024 candidates per
task and measured hallucination rate (RDKit parsing failures), scaffold preservation, and any-property success across three scaffold
constraints: Bemis-Murcko, ring system, and complete molecular
structure.
Task A produced 0% hallucination, 89.8–93.8% scaffold preservation, and 72.3–79.3% any-property success. Task B achieved 100%
scaffold preservation and 100% any-property success but exhibited
29.7–39.8% hallucination (Figure 7, Table 2). The out-of-distribution
task outperformed on validity. We attribute this to learned biases
for DRD2 optimization in the training data. When scaffold constraints conflict with these patterns, the model forces modifications
that produce invalid molecules. Structural similarity confirms this:
Task A generated conservative modifications (Tanimoto centered
at 0.8), whereas Task B showed bimodal behavior with peaks at 0.6
and 1.0 (Figure 8).

c Exact structure: the complete molecular structure.

Figure 7: (a) Core scaffold preservation rate across constraint
types. (b) Hallucination rate measured as RDKit parsing
failures. Task A represents out-of-distribution optimization (CARC, hERG, LIVER, PLogP). Task B represents indistribution optimization (DRD2, PLogP). 𝑛=1,024 candidates
per task.

A.4

Framework for Evaluating Properties

The evaluated property scores are grouped into three categories:
ADMET properties, physicochemical properties, and Drug-Likeness.
To maintain a clean interface, each category is displayed within an
expandable accordion section. Within each category, the properties scores are listed in a structured tabular format. In addition to
properties scores, similar compounds for each molecule, retrieved
through PubChem’s PUG REST 7 .

A.5

We used a total of five properties in Tasks A and B. Task A included
PlogP, hERG, CARC, and LIVER, while Task B included PlogP, QED,
DRD2, and LIVER.

Figure 8: Structural similarity distributions between seed and
generated molecules. (a) Task A shows tight distributions
indicating conservative modifications. (b) Task B exhibits bimodal Tanimoto coefficients suggesting variable generation
behavior.

• PlogP (Penalized logP) [42]: PlogP is the octanol–water
partition coefficient (logP); higher values are preferred.
• hERG [51]: hERG refers to whether a compound blocks a
heart potassium channel (called hERG); lower values are
preferred.
• CARC (Carcinogenicity) [102]: CARC refers to the risk that
a compound could cause cancer; lower values are preferred.

A.3

Details on properties

Computational Evaluation of Molecule
Generation

We evaluated the generation reliability of Llama 3.1 8B-Instruct
fine-tuned on C-MuMOInstruct [25] using property combinations

7 https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/docs/pug-rest

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2025, Woodstock, NY

Anon.

• DRD2 [46]: DRD2 refers to the probability that a compound
blocks the dopamine D2 receptor (DRD2); higher values are
preferred.
• QED [7]: QED refers to overall drug-likeness by incorporating molecular weight, lipophilicity, and hydrogen bonding
ability– higher QED is desired for better drug-likeness
• LIVER (Drug-induced liver injury risk) [43]: LIVER risk describes the propensity of a compound to cause liver injury;
lower values are preferred.

of the median scaffold size), and decomposition quality. A greedy
set-cover algorithm selects up to three complementary cores that
maximize cluster coverage.
R-group library construction. Each selected core defines a decomposition using RDKit’s R-group decomposition. Matching molecules
are split into the shared scaffold and variable side chains at numbered attachment sites, producing a frequency-ranked catalog of
observed R-group fragments at each site.
Chemotype profiling. Each molecule is annotated for ring systems, functional groups, and structural alerts using medicinal chemistry catalogs. Per-molecule profiles are aggregated at the cluster
level into motif frequencies and alert themes.

A.6

Baseline Interface

To isolate and evaluate co-abductive reasoning, we developed a baseline system (Figure 11). The baseline includes non-co-abductive
components and excludes three co-abductive features (e.g., MolCluster, MolStrategy, and MolSynthesis). First, users can use the
generative AI model in HALO to generate molecules on the trajectory map, and then check the property scores for four targeted
properties (green: augmented and red: worsened). Newly edited
or generated molecules appear beneath the original molecule, connected by a dashed line. If users choose to edit a molecule, the
pop-up window is divided into a chemical editor and a properties
panel that updates in real time as changes are made in the editor on
the right. By right-clicking on any molecule node, users can access
a side panel where the properties and LLM interface are located.
The properties display includes various ADMET, physicochemical,
and Drug-Likeness scores, as well as similar compounds found in
PubChem. The LLM interface allows users to input queries to assist with their tasks (e.g., searching for references, strategies for
optimization, etc.).

Cluster overview generation. Pareto statistics, property ranges,
scaffold distributions, and alert themes are assembled into structured context and passed to Gemini 3 Flash, which generates a
natural-language summary of the cluster’s strengths and weaknesses.
A.7.3 Stage 3: Strategy Synthesis Pipeline. The strategy pipeline
transforms cluster annotations into actionable optimization recommendations by integrating inter-cluster and intra-cluster structural
insights.
Source molecule selection. Candidates are ranked using Pareto
evaluation criteria (objectives met, Pareto optimality, baseline improvement), and the top three are chosen as source molecules. Each
source is decomposed relative to the cluster’s core to show its
current R-group assignment and available alternatives from the
R-group library.

A.7

Technical Details of HALO

We describe the technical details of HALO in terms of three main
components: MolCluster, MolStrategy, and MolSynthesis (Figure 9).
A.7.1 Stage 1: Candidate Generation Pipeline. The generation pipeline
converts a user’s optimization task into scored candidate molecules.
The system constructs a structured prompt that encodes the source
molecule as a SMILES string, selected ADMET property targets,
and their optimization directions (e.g., decrease hERG, increase
pLogP). Each property direction and threshold is formatted as an
adjustment instruction.
The prompt is processed by Llama 3.1 8B-Instruct, fine-tuned on
C-MuMOInstruct [25]. The model generates multiple SMILES candidates per request, which are extracted using <SMILES>. . . </SMILES>
delimiters, then validated, canonicalized, and deduplicated with
RDKit.
A.7.2 Stage 2: Cluster Annotation Pipeline. The annotation pipeline
runs when a user opens a cluster’s detail view, computing five
parallel analyses that characterize the cluster’s structure-activity
profile.

Cross-cluster fragment import. The system evaluates neighboring
clusters by running abbreviated Pareto evaluations and selecting the
highest-ranked molecules. Pairwise MCS computations between
primary sources and neighboring molecules identify regions of
structural overlap. Where sufficient overlap exists, the system extracts R-group fragments from neighbors that are absent from the
primary cluster’s library, introducing structurally validated modification options from related chemical contexts.
Strategy generation. A structured prompt containing the source
molecules, their R-group assignments, all available intra-cluster
and inter-cluster alternatives, and the optimization objectives is
processed by Gemini 3 Flash. Each returned strategy specifies a
title, target property, natural-language rationale, source molecule,
attachment site, current fragment SMILES, and replacement fragment SMILES. Strategies are classified as intra-cluster (from the
cluster’s own library) or inter-cluster (from neighboring clusters).
Post-processing and validation. All SMILES strings are canonicalized and validated. Common LLM encoding errors in aromatic
fragments are corrected using standard ring templates.

Core scaffold detection. Shared scaffolds are identified through
a two-phase MCS search. First, a global MCS is computed across
all cluster members. To address diverse clusters where the global
MCS may be trivially small, a per-scaffold MCS is also computed
within the five largest Murcko scaffold subgroups. Candidate cores
are filtered by coverage, minimum heavy atom count (at least 60%

HALO : Interactive Co-abductive Reasoning in Scientific Hypothesis Generation

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2025, Woodstock, NY

Figure 9: Overview of the HALO pipeline.

MolStrategy: Overview

MolStrategy: Candidates

Figure 10: Two tabs of MolStrategy. The overview tab displays an AI-generated summary of the cluster alongside its identified
strengths and weaknesses. A scaffold image shows the shared core structure identified across cluster members, and a top
candidates section highlights the highest-ranked molecules based on Pareto evaluation. The candidates tab lists all cluster
members in a sortable table, where users can toggle between absolute property scores and improvement deltas relative to the
baseline. Delta values are color-coded to indicate improvements and regressions.

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2025, Woodstock, NY

Anon.

Initial Molecule

Molecular Information

Molecule Editor

LLM Search

Molecule Generator

New Molecules

Figure 11: The baseline interface used for user studies. The Molecule Editor and Molecule Generator appears as pop-up windows
when user’s selects from a context menu. Molecular Information and LLM appears in side panel when expanded. (green:
augmented and red: worsened)

Initial lead compound

Case-1: Three properties were augmented

Case-2: A property was augmented

Task-A

O=C(COc1ccccc1)NC1CCN(Cc2ccccc2)CC1

Cc1cccc(NC(=O)N2CCN(Cc3ccccc3)CC2)c1

O=C(C)NC1CCC(C2=NC=C(O)C=C2)CC1

PlogP: 2.119

CARC: 0.101

PlogP: 0.328

CARC: 0.092

PlogP: 0.689

CARC: 0.286

hERG: 0.924

DILI: 0.092

hERG: 0.495

LIVER: 0.054

hERG: 0.008

LIVER: 0.108

Initial lead compound

Case-3: Three properties were augmented

Case-4: A property was augmented

Task-B

COc1cc2c(cc1OC)C(c1ccc3ccccc3c1)NCC2

Cc1cccc(Nc2cc(C(=O)O)cc(N3CCC(C(=O)O)
CC3)c2)c1

COC1=C(OC)C=C2C(N(CCC)CCC2=C1OC
C(=O)OC)C1=CC2=C(C=CC=C2)C=C1

PlogP: 1.928

DRD2: 0.016

PlogP: 2.21

DRD2: 0.019

PlogP: 1.86

DRD2: 0.102

QED: 0.899

DILI: 0.682

QED: 1.136

LIVER: 0.905

QED: 0.429

LIVER: 0.736

Figure 12: The initial lead compounds and the desired properties of Task-A and Task-B. Four representative cases illustrate
contrasting outcomes: Cases 1 and 3 show ideal results, where three properties were improved simultaneously, whereas Cases 2
and 4 show less desirable results, where only one property was improved at the expense of the others (green: augmented and
red: worsened). For PlogP, DRD2, and QED, higher values indicate more desirable outcomes, whereas for hERG, CARC, and
LIVER, lower values are preferred. Please refer to the details of these properties §A.5 in the appendix.

HALO : Interactive Co-abductive Reasoning in Scientific Hypothesis Generation

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2025, Woodstock, NY

Table 3: Definitions used to label participants’ actions for the user studies.

Label

Description

Molecule Generated (AI)

• Participant generate from a preexisting molecule.

Molecule Generated (Manual)

• Participant saves an manually edited molecule.

• Participant edits a preexisting molecule before generating.

• Participant modifies the filters and applied changes.

MolCluster

• Participant utilizes MolCluster panel to select or deselect at least one property from a cluster.

• Participant utilizes selection tool to group or ungroup at least two molecules.

MolStrategy

• Participant actively interacts (e.g., scroll or click) with MolStrategy panel.

MolSynthesis

• Participant clicks on at least one strategy in MolSynthesis panel.

Insight

• Participant clicks on the “Insight” button.

Table 4: Participant demographics and study participation. Senior: Senior Researcher; Postdoc: Postdoctoral Researcher; PhD
Cand.: Ph.D. Candidate.

ID

Age

Profession

YoE

Formative

𝑃1
𝑃2
𝑃3
𝑃4
𝑃5
𝑃6
𝑃7
𝑃8
𝑃9
𝑃10
𝑃11
𝑃12

36–45
26–35
36–45
36–45
26–35
26–35
26–35
26–35
36–45
26–35
26–35
26–35

Senior R.
PhD Cand.
Postdoc
Senior R.
Senior R.
Postdoc
Postdoc
Postdoc
Senior R.
Postdoc
Postdoc
Postdoc

✓
✓
✓
✓
✓

User Study

✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2025, Woodstock, NY

Anon.

[System Message]
You are an expert medicinal chemist specializing in molecular optimization. You understand how structural modifications affect key

ADMET properties and inhibitions of common receptor targets like DRD2.

[User Message]

{instruction}

%%% Input: <SMILES>{source_smiles}</SMILES>

%%% Adjust: {list of adjustment_prompt}

[Template]

instructions:

1. "Adjust the molecular structure to ensure that each specified property reaches the corresponding threshold listed in <THRESHOLD>
</THRESHOLD>. Minimize structural changes and try to maintain the input <SMILES>. Return the resulting molecule using <SMILES>

</SMILES> tags”

2. "Alter the molecule to satisfy the provided property thresholds in <THRESHOLD> </THRESHOLD>. Preserve

the input <SMILES> and

make as few structural changes as possible. Output the SMILES of the new molecule, enclosed in <SMILES> </SMILES>."
3. "Update the given molecule so that the specified properties fall within acceptable ranges defined by the values in <THRESHOLD>
</THRESHOLD>. Maintain as much of the input <SMILES> as possible. Output only the modified molecule enclosed in <SMILES>
</SMILES> tags."
4. "Modify the molecule to bring its properties to at least the levels defined in <THRESHOLD> </THRESHOLD>. Avoid excessive
modifications and preserve

the input <SMILES>. Output only the resulting molecule's SMILES wrapped in <SMILES> </SMILES>."

5. "Edit the molecular structure so that all required properties match or exceed the threshold values defined in <THRESHOLD>
</THRESHOLD>. Try to retain

the input <SMILES>. Output only the SMILES representation of the optimized molecule enclosed in

<SMILES> </SMILES>."
6. “Your task is to modify the given molecule to adjust specific molecular properties so that the resulting molecule satisfies the

given target thresholds. Keep structural changes as minimal as possible. Your response should only contain a valid SMILES

representation of the modified molecule enclosed in <SMILES> </SMILES> tags. The property values of the new molecule should meet

or exceed the specified targets enclosed in <THRESHOLD> </THRESHOLD> tags.”

adjustment_prompt:
1. "{change} {property} to be {direction} <THRESHOLD> {value} </THRESHOLD>"

2. "{change} the value of {property} to be {direction} <THRESHOLD> {value} </THRESHOLD>"

3. "{change} {property} aiming for {direction} <THRESHOLD> {value} </THRESHOLD>"

4. "{change} {property} so it is {direction} <THRESHOLD> {value} </THRESHOLD>"

5. "{change} {property} with a goal of {direction} <THRESHOLD> {value} </THRESHOLD>"

Figure 13: The prompts used to generate molecules through Llama 3.1 8B-Instruct. Source_smiles refers to the SMILES string
combining the core scaffold and preserving R-groups. Instruction is selected at random from the “instructions” list in Template.
For each optimizing property, an adjustment_prompt is appended by randomly selecting a prompt from “adjustment_prompt”
list in Template, with variables (denoted by { }) filled in for each ADMET property.
